foreign
category and product-led growth has a
very similar potential we're in any
number one of like such an amazing
Revolution and disruption to software
the world of investing needs a venture
capital firm that's running back by
sales and marketing professionals we
have like the crl the CML the CCO from
most of the cloud 100 from Snowflake to
Asana to atlassian to Salesforce to
Oracle to sap we want to be moving as
fast as possible but sometimes that fast
as possible how fast you're learning
when I get nervous and I have goals and
I'm stressed I move to science and data
what is it that you could see in the
first month of a customer's life cycle
with you that if that happens they're
going to be with you forever
let's define what that lead indicator
success is and let's see if we can get
70 to 80 percent to hit you can do that
I'm very excited about the business
we're going to build together
[Music]
what does this team do
what does this team do growth
I know what sales does I know what
marketing does you know what product
does you know engineer and I know
Finance I know HR and we've got this
growth team that's where we're going to
debunk today
specifically in a plg context
so I've been thinking about this for a
while and um
I don't know some of the best
descriptions I see for plg is uh the
consumerization of software
I like that the consumerization of
software
and if you buy that for plg
then perhaps we can draw some parallels
between the highest fly and most
successful consumer tech companies and
what they do in their growth team
and learn for them for our grow teams in
plg
and so three years ago I started a class
at Harvard Business School to explore
that and I had the growth leaders from
LinkedIn and Pinterest and Lyft and
Facebook and also on the BW plg side
like Shopify and Alaskan Hassan and
Dropbox and my students I studied these
teams
and we see a pretty big gap between the
average median B2B plg Grill team and
what these teams are doing and that's
where we're going to kind of demystify
in the beginning and then we'll move to
some of the go to market overlays so
what does the growth team do this is not
profound they manage these self-serve
funnel
and this is a very simple way to talk
about that self-serve funnel they
acquire free users they retain those
free users
they monetize them
and then they expand them
but my question for you is if your
growth team if your company
could be best in class at one of these
and averages the others
which would you choose
which of these four would you want to be
best in class at
how many of you would want to be best in
class at free user acquisition and
average with the rest don't be shy
how many of you would want to be best in
class at free user retention and average
with the rest
almost half how many of you would want
to be best in class at monetization and
expansion I'll put those together
almost half a little more than half
that's what I actually see is I see a
lot of B2B growth teams and plg
companies focus on the monetization but
these folks that we studied focused on
the free user retention
and it might challenge us to think a
little differently that we were pretty
split on that and maybe we can debate it
so anyway the
what these teams do is they actually
while they think the free user retention
is the most important they actually
evolve their North Star metric as they
achieve different milestones
so the first thing they do is try to
create
a flow of free users to experiment with
and they kind of force them in there
they don't care about the [__] to do it
this is where they use like paid digital
marketing can we get 100 users in here a
day can we get 100 users in here a week
the faster we get the users in the
faster we can experiment the faster we
can learn
and then they focus on free user
attention
there's two ways I personally like to
look at this particular goal here the
first is by Sean Ellis on the left and
the second is by Brian Balfour on the
right and they happen sequentially
Sean Ellis is from growth hackers he was
an early growth consultant at Dropbox
he's done a bunch of these this
particular analysis is a great article
um around superhuman if you use that
email productivity tool
and what he argues is when you have your
first 30 40 60 80 users survey them
and ask them how disappointed would they
be if your product didn't exist
and he if he argues that if 40 or more
are very disappointed then you have very
strong signals of product Market fit and
if you don't you should talk to them and
find out why
but eventually you'll evolve out of that
eventually you'll start acquiring 100
users a week and you can move to Brian
belfor's chart who's founded the reforge
school and what you see here is each
color
are users acquired in a given week so we
acquire 100 users in the first week
and after week two and week three and
week four how many are still active
so if that chart goes to zero you cannot
move forward you do not have a business
you cannot focus on monetization
but if you acquire 100 users in a week
and after week two after week three
after week four twenty or Thirty are
still active still active still active
you have achieved something that few
entrepreneurs achieve
I might argue that's the most important
piece of the plg journey
I might argue that if you can get people
to stick and continues your product you
will figure out the scalable user
acquisition model and you will figure
out the monetization model and that's
where they go next now we we've proven
that we can put 100 200 users into this
funnel and they'll stick around some
percentage forever
but can we do that scalably
so now we move to things like virality
we move to content marketing to decrease
that user acquisition cost I remember
when we were doing this a HubSpot for
the CRM product
we looked at him like oh my gosh to
acquire a free user for our serum it
cost us 120 each user
for a free product
so we focused on that we did 17
experiments in a month and they got it
down to twelve dollars
and it was through virality and content
marketing and those more scalable
channels and then finally they moved to
modernization in the B2B plg world at
the board level at the investor level at
the founder level we skipped to
monetization too quickly
these best-in-class companies think free
user retention is the best and they are
is the most important and they evolve
their North Star metric accordingly
quality data-driven experimentation
these are rapid experimentation teams
that activate and instrument the funnels
they know that their activation rate is
47 and their goal in the next three
weeks is to get that to 61 they know
that their free user retention is 22 and
their goal is to get to 37 that's how
they're operating
and they segment it
this is an important learning for our
Founders is we don't
we don't need to get every single user
to love our product we just need to get
a large enough segment
so we don't need to do an analysis on
you know these these free user buckets
on every single user maybe it's just
sales people maybe it's people in
finance maybe people that are in North
America and other places so we can
segment to find where do we have product
Market fit so we can move to the other
goals and shockingly shockingly these
consumer growth companies I am so
surprised on how much engineering effort
they invest in making experimentation
easy at their company by non-technical
people
some of them say that over half of their
engineering resources are not spent
developing features that a consumer will
ever experience
they're spent making experimentation
easy
and think about it in your context in
B2B plg
is your marketing team bothering your
product and engineering team every time
they want to run an in-app notification
experiment
is it worth it for you to have one
engineer spend three days in making it
easy for marketing and non-technical
people to run as many in-app
notification experiments as they want
that's super valuable and that's how
these consumer growth companies work and
think
also create an experiment log this takes
seven minutes to write
what is the experiment What's the
hypothesis how are you going to run it
what were the results and what did we
learn and what is the next experiment
we're going to do and they review this
as a team every week and guess what
a month from now or two months from now
when another person joins their growth
team they spend the first day reading
all the experiment logs
and they're right up to speed on what
you know today and what you're trying to
figure out
Okay the third thing they do is they run
in a cross-functional team
they don't put like Marketing in charge
of free user acquisition and product in
charge of monetization and retention
they put them all working on the North
Star metric today because if you don't
you're going to end up with local
maximums
what's going to happen is the product
team is going to say listen we can't get
any of these users to stick because
marketing is not generally the right
users
and Mark is going to say product team
wants like left-handed plumbers in
Arkansas it's like an unrealistic
request
so we have to have these two teams work
together in growth and Harmony on the
North Star metric they put them together
as a cross-functional team and this is
how they typically evolve when we go
from seed to A to B when you see like
this is like three or four people
they're athletes they're full stack
Engineers that have some design skills
they're product managers that might not
might be able to code a little bit but
then as you get to the series a they
become Specialists and you have a data
scientist you have a full-time designer
you have a legit PM you have a couple
full stack Engineers maybe you have a
CSM on the team and as you graduate to b
c and d these teams are specialized by
products or features at Lyft they have a
grow team for the Riders and they have a
grow team for the drivers and that's how
we evolve today
okay so that's the basics of what these
folks do
now what about the go to market overlay
there's a lot of Founders that are super
hesitant of like I've got this beautiful
they're product Founders I've got this
beautiful growth plg motion if I add a
salesperson will it ruin it
will it ruin that magic
and a lot of times it does and these are
the four things that I often see on the
difference between these high scale
folks
and and the failure and mistakes that
happen
where does the grow team sit
does your growth team or are you or you
put your growth team in sales product
or marketing
are you going to put your growth team in
sales in product or in marketing
how many have or will put your pro your
growth team in in sales
how many will put it in product
how many will put it in marketing
okay we're still split a little between
product and marketing and this was a
surprise to me because a lot of these
startups I see
in plg almost all of them actually put
their growth teams in marketing
and I think that's an opportunity
because all of the Best in Class ones
put their growth team in product
and what happens if you put your grow
team in marketing is you won't have any
engineers
I've never had met an engineer
whose career goal was to work in
marketing
like no offense right it's just like not
what they want to do and so if you have
your growth team which a lot of these
plg companies put them in marketing
you're not going to have any any
engineers and if you don't have any
Engineers on your growth team you're
going to be limited to your
experimentation footprint to top of the
funnel nothing in the product and your
competition is going to do the opposite
and they're going to beat you
so if you can actually put your growth
team into the product team
you will attract engineers and have that
full stack motion that we want and
you'll beat the competition because your
experimentation footprint will be much
broader now thank you so much for the
questions after and thank you so much
for the comments and questions on the
blog articles that we write because I
learned from you and I tweak the
messaging and the Frameworks and one of
the concerns that the audience had when
I've talked about this before is aren't
you going to turn your marketers into
product marketers if you do this
because seriously what do a lot of
marketers want to work in product and
then they become product marketers so I
have some small font there for you to
read and remind you if you consume this
later but that's not what happens
because when you look at these high
performing growth teams in product these
organizations have actually siled their
product and Engineering teams into core
product that owns the roadmap and growth
that owns the funnel
and so the core product team with the
roadmap that's a different type of if
marketing goes in there yes they will
become a product marketer
but for the growth team that owns the
funnel those marketers are performance
marketers they're demand gen marketers
they don't become product marketers
otherwise you're not doing it right so
thank you for those questions and
hopefully that clarifies that concern
okay
how do we add the sales team
in there without ruining the motion
and really what it comes down to is
comparing the growth rate of your growth
funnel
compared to the growth rate of your
sales team
the growth rate of your growth funnel
while you measure that as users or M or
Maus or pqls product qualified leads
that has to grow faster
than your sales head count
because if it doesn't like when you
first add these two two sales people and
it's beautiful
these sales people call on these folks
who've adopted the product they're ready
to upgrade some of the the rest of their
companies adopting it and they can help
nurture that with executive sponsorship
it's beautiful but then when you double
the size of your sales team and only
increase your growth funnel by 20 these
sales people get desperate they have to
make their quota so they start calling
these leads earlier before they can
actually adopt the product and they
start giving them demos and they start
sending them contracts before they've
seen the value and you've ruined this
growth funnel and you've gone from adopt
before buy model to a buy before adopt
you've accidentally changed yourself to
a sales lead growth model
so if you if you actually grow the
acquisition model
faster than your sales team than the
magic retains and you stay product like
growth the pqls per sales person stays
static and you have nice expansion
okay
the third mistake
the comp plan actually drives this
the comp plan drives that behavior of
making the quota and ruining the pql
funnel because a lot of cases we're
using compensation models from the 1970s
in the 1970s we were selling on-premise
software
whoever had the best sales team won
product quality didn't matter
that's what many people argue
because the moment that they signed the
contract that company was committed to
buying 50 servers in their basement
hooking up to the local area network and
spending six months training the entire
fifty thousand person company on how
this software worked and the software
sucked and that's where shelfware came
about and that's how the companies that
won in the 70s and 80s and 90s worked
but due to a lot of different things
from the internet to SAS to Cloud to all
this stuff that world has changed but
compensation plans have not we are still
paying our sales people more for the
first revenue from a company
and less or nothing at all for expansion
Revenue
beautiful comp plan design for the 1970s
terrible comp plan design for plg
because this is what happens in a plg
motion the buyer says hey I love your
product and I'm ready to upgrade can I
upgrade to the pro version
and what does the salesperson say they
say no you have to upgrade the entire
team and Company
but no one else uses it I don't care you
have to do it because they're thinking
that's how I get paid
and you switch to that's what drives the
adopt before the buy before adopt and it
ruins CAC it ruins expansion it ruins
retention
but if we can just pay our sales people
a little bit more
pay them more for the expansion
then our sales people become aligned
they become aligned with the buyer and
when the buyer says listen I would like
a pro account the salesperson says great
and by the way
does anyone else at your company use it
why don't we get them set up with some
free accounts and I'll check in in a
week or a month or whatever it might be
to see how that's going and we retain
the adopt before buy model and we retain
the beauty of plg
okay
this and final mistake is on pricing
oh gosh I forgot my asterisk on that one
so can you actually go back one second
no no back on the clicker
um
so uh there's one other concern that
people brought up here and that is are
you just turning your sales people into
customer success people and that's not
what I'm advocating here that's not what
I'm advocating just because they're
getting paid more on the expansion a lot
of research has shown that the success
of a customer in retaining and expanding
has a lot more to do with the sales
process than the onboarding process it's
the expectations that are set case in
point let's say there's some I.T
configuration work that's needed for
your product to be successful A
salesperson doesn't have to talk to it
to get the deal sold but that company is
not going to be successful unless it's
bought in and if they're surprised by
this purchase they're going to be pissed
and they're never going to set up and
this thing's going to turn
and so this is just motivating sales
people to set expectations properly so
that the expansion occurs you still use
your CSM team okay so a little
clarification there all right the fourth
mistake on pricing I almost didn't put
this in there's very little literature
on optimal pricing and plg
so I re I put it in because I want to
start the conversation and I wanted to
get your reactions to this and so maybe
in the next year we can talk a little
more and try to figure this out and so
let me just lay the groundwork for a
hypothetical adoption cycle of a company
where you have a user that finds this
company plg they set it up they hit the
aha moment or moment of value or lead
indicator of retention or whatever you
want to call it
and then they become a power user and
when they become a power user they tell
everyone else at the company and
virality occurs and now more and more
people start using it and then the CIO
or the executive team finds out and
they're like oh my gosh we get to lock
this thing down we got to make it secure
we got to integrate with a tech stack
so where should we put the pricing tier
because we work really hard in Project
Engineering in plg with user experiences
and user interfaces to remove friction
from adoption
but then we introduce pricing models
that introduce friction to adoption it's
inevitable
but where should we put it I don't think
a lot of people put it here
I don't see a lot of examples of putting
a pricing tier that prevents someone
from becoming getting value a lot of
people put it here
a lot of people put the pricing model
where it's once you hit the aha moment
let's start charging them so they have
to pay to become a power user maybe
that's right I don't know if I agree
more people put it here which is like
yeah become a power user but when you
have three users or four users you have
to start paying and that slows down
virality
I personally like putting it here if we
can
because the end user is not going to
care if the executives have to pay to
make this secure or to get the dashboard
that they so they can know more about
their business or to integrate it with
their Tech stack it doesn't stand in the
way of the power user
and you might say well maybe we're
leaving leaving money on the table maybe
we're leaving money on the table what I
was having this debate with uh Liz
Cristo one of my colleagues at stage two
she'll be on tomorrow I think around
three o'clock
and she's seeing early signs of this as
well
which is one of the beauties of plg
and the reason why I think this is such
a disruptive business model
is if a user wants to adopt a new
category and option A is do a sales demo
and then pay ten thousand dollars a year
and then start using it and option b is
do a sales demo and pay ten thousand
dollars a year and start using it and
option C is download the thing for free
and start using it and then pay if I
like it the buyer is always going to
choose option C that's why plg is so
powerful
but as more and more categories where
plg is applicable
I bet buyers may get a little smarter
about that they might see that option A
is do a sales demo pay ten thousand
dollars a year and then use it they're
not going to do that one option b is
download it for free and use it up to 50
messages option C is downloads and use
it for free up to 500 messages we're not
there yet but we might be there soon and
if you buy into that then the pricing
models that don't put friction in in
getting buyers to get to the aha moment
getting them to become power users and
creating virality will win something to
think about I don't know but we got to
figure that out
okay
what if we try plg and fail
I do believe that plg
has the same disruptive potential that
SAS had in the last 20 years it reminds
me a lot about SAS
I don't think it's as applicable to as
many categories as SAS was SAS was
applicable to almost every Tech category
plg is not and I'll show you some
literature on that
but for the categories that it is
just like today the public markets in
B2B are dominated by the SAS attackers I
predict in the next decade the plg
attackers will dominate the public
markets for the categories that it's in
because it's really hard just like it
was hard to be an on-premise software
company and move to SAS it's really hard
to be a non-plg sales LED growth growth
company and move to plg I actually did
just did a talk with Blake over openview
on his podcast that I thought I think is
going out next week on how to make that
move and it's really hard
Okay so
should you try plg yes
give it a shot and here's the reason why
if you try it and it fails all you're
left with is a very easy to adopt
product that's what you're left with and
it's really easy to move to sales lead
growth and you're not going to be
looking over your shoulders for the next
10 years to see if a plg attacker is
gonna win because you gave it a legit
shot and for whatever reason it's not
applicable to your category so give it a
shot the other thing I see is
the mistake of waiting to implement plg
Mark we love plg we're gonna get to 2
million in revenue and then we're going
to move to plg
you're stacking the cards against you
because it's hard enough to have a white
space brand new company
and architect the perfect product and
pricing tier and and free user motion
never mind having two million dollars in
Revenue with 500 customers and you're
asking ourselves if we choose this
product and pricing model how much of
that will cannibalize down
how many people who are paying us ten
thousand dollars a year will stop paying
us and just use the free product the
minute you start designing your plg
funnel with cannibalization in mind
you're cooked
because someone else is going to
cannibalize you someone is going to
disrupt you
and you've got to disrupt yourself
so just be careful about waiting because
it gets a lot harder so these slides are
actually posted on the stage two Capital
LinkedIn right now so you can go there
and download it I talk to you that um is
plg applicable to my category we don't
have time to go into that today I think
this is a really important question
because I think if it is the plg
attackers will win and it might as well
be you and this is just an article that
you can check out to analyze How likely
plg is applicable to you and then as we
uh just the uh the takeaways here you
can see in there on the key points that
we covered here and I know on the on the
great opening here they talked about
stage two Capital we are the first VC
firm that's running back exclusively by
go to market
Executives so we have two funds we have
a series a growth fund and we have a uh
a grow a go to market accelerator the
growth fund is backed by over 300 CR
CMOS ccos from the most famous software
companies in the world like Snowflake
and OCTA and GitHub and twilio and drift
who's coming on after this and then on
the accelerator we have the managers and
directors we've got 200 of those that
help out the seeds funded businesses we
invest in anything B2B software or
Marketplace is whether it's devops or
industrial SAS vertical marketplaces
fintech Etc usually these companies on
the top are around a million in revenue
is when we get involved and these are
tens of thousands to hundreds of
thousands and this is the stuff that we
hop them with
you know building out that first sales
team we've put out a lot of content out
there thank you so much for coming in
and commenting on it um if you want to
download the science of scaling or how
to build your first Revenue plan you can
check that out on the blog and I hope
you enjoy the show thank you so much for
Lumpkin and team for the great platform
have a great quarter and a great show
thanks so much
[Applause]
[Music]
thank you